Section 16 of a book I own titled 50 Philosophy Ideas You Really Need to Know (which I actually got from you, Bayer. Thanks a million, I really enjoy the book!) discusses the idea of ends & means and consequentialism, or, as it is more commonly known as, the trolley problem. Essentially, a consequentialist proposes that the question of whether an action is right or wrong should be determined purely on the basis of its consequences; an action is regarded merely as a means to some desirable end, and its rightness or wrongness is a measure of how effective it is in achieving that end. By contrast, deontologists propose that actions are not seen merely as means to an end but as right or wrong in themselves. Actions are thought to have intrinsic value in their own right, not just instrumental value in contributing towards some desirable end. For example, according to deontologists, killing is an inherently wrong action, no matter what goal it is utilized to achieve. Consequentialists focus more on what was achieved, how effectively it was achieved, rather than how it was achieved. In the scenario from the excerpt, the dispute over the actions of the ship members is viewed as wrong both by consequentialists and deontologists. Deontologists would see killing Parker as inherently wrong, no matter how close to Death’s door he was, no matter what shape he was in. Consequentialists would see killing Parker as morally justified if it effectively saved the other seafarers. But, Dudley and his two crewmates were saved by a stroke of luck, not through the surety that is they killed Parker they would live. Theoretically, they acted out of necessity, since Parker was beyond saving and they would rather use his body for sustenance than throw it into the sea and feed the sharks. However, if Parker had been in salvageable condition, killing him would have been seen as wrong, since cannibalism was not a surefire way to be saved. To summarize, killing can be justifiable in several cases. Killing few to save many is a case-particular instance where the killing of a few may be justifiable depending on the conditions of those few, the situation, etc. Killing is also justifiable in self-defense. However, justifiable killing isn’t the problem. What is really the problem is the question “could people live with themselves if they committed a justifiable murder?” Most people become uneasy when faced with “kill the few to save the many” situations simply because they don’t like the fact that they are the ones tasked with taking the lives, no matter how many. One example in the book is an airliner carrying 120 passengers is hurtling out of control towards a densely populated area. There is no time to evacuate the area and the impact of the plane is certain to kill thousands. The only possible move is to shoot down the plane. Should you do it? Logically, yes. When I presented this question to a friend, he answered quickly and firmly, “Yes!” He said that the 120 passengers are going to die anyways, but if you can save the thousands you should. Moral guilt is the biggest roadblock to a seemingly simple choice. Most people would rather not be the one to take someone else’s life. An alternate viewpoint is that since moral wrongs are already in place in the situation, shooting down the plane constitutes a participation in the moral wrong, making one partially responsible for the death when otherwise no one would be responsible. Why is killing wrong? According to common law, there are six elements that constitute murder, one of which is malicious aforethought. In killing-few-to-save-many cases, those responsible for killing few would not be murdering anyone. Or, to explain it in other words, a crime consists of a guilty act and a guilty mind. But, in scenarios similar or identical to the trolley problem, there is no guilty mind. Perhaps there is a guilty conscience presiding afterwards, but the trolley problem cannot be considered a criminal act but rather a moral dilemma. In a sense, common law is similar to consequentialism in that jurisdiction is based on previous cases as precedence but common law still takes into account the current case, and allows judges to distinguish between cases and create new precedents based on new facts. In consequentialism, an action that is seen as morally wrong by deontologists is evaluated by the morality of its end result and how the action arrived at the result, similar to the refining process seen in common law. On the other hand, civil law is similar to deontologism in that judicial codes are prewritten without previous cases to support it, just like how in deontologism, some actions are viewed as morally wrong no matter what their intention was or what it achieved. If I were to design a new legal system, I would choose a common law approach but have my legal system be influenced by other ideologies and ethical theories besides just law and justice, such as utilitarianism, consequentialism, exceptionism, etc. I’d choose a common law approach because I don’t like the idea of governing law by codes set in stone; I’d prefer flexibility in serving justice and enforcing the law. While my legal system would give precedence to previous cases, I believe principles and logic are far more important than codes people inscribe onto pieces of paper. My legal system would strive to maintain rationality while leaving everything open to questioning and reevaluation.
Oftentimes prejudice and jumping to conclusions can lead to flaws and incorrect judgment in legal cases. In cases that involve the death penalty, sometimes the consequences of incorrect judgment is irreversible. In a thorough and penetrating article published in The New Yorker on August 31, David Grann offers further evidence that Texas probably executed an innocent man in 2004. Grann carefully examines all the evidence that was used in the two-day trial in 1992 to convict Cameron Todd Willingham of murder by arson of his three young children. It is now well established through a series of investigations by other fire experts that the forensic evidence of arson presented at trial had no scientific basis and should not have led to Willingham's conviction. Another piece of evidence used at the trial was the testimony of a jailhouse informant who said that Willingham had confessed to the crime, despite the fact that he had always maintained his innocence and even refused a plea bargain to avoid the death penalty.  The informer eventually received early release, tried to recant his testimony, and is now no longer sure what he heard. He also suffers from mental disorders. Willingham's lawyers thought he was 100% guilty and offered no rebuttal expert to question the finding of arson. At the sentencing hearing, the prosecution put on a psychiatrist, Dr. James Grigson, who made a living helping to send defendants to death row by testifying to their future dangerousness without even interviewing them, who accused Willingham of being an “extremely severe sociopath.” However, when acclaimed scientist and fire investigator Dr. Gerald Hurst came forward for conclusive evidence that Willingham did not set the fire he was convicted for, and that no arson was committed, neither the governor’s office nor the board acknowledged nor called any attention to it. Arson is investigated by elite law enforcement units using the most advanced chemical analyses to locate the point of origin of a fire. Law enforcement can take months or years to fully investigate before a case is charged. Law enforcement looks at the motivation behind the crime of arson. Arson occurs in domestic violence cases, to hide another crime including murder and for financial gain. However, I believe that prejudice and doubt clouded the visions of Vasquez and Fogg. Most of the responsibility of the mistaken conviction falls on Vasquez’s shoulders. He relied on his experience in fire investigations that he did not consider any other alternatives than arson and intentional murder. If arson cases take months or years to fully investigate, then how could Vasquez come to a reliable conclusion if he only spent a few hours in the Willingham’s residence? In addition, the investigators relied too much on the testimony of unreliable witnesses and other inmates. It is almost as if Vasquez had the notion of arson ingrained in his head and thought he was finding signs of arson as evidence. However, Dr. Hurst refuted all of Fogg and Vasquez’s list of more than twenty arson indicators, with his refutations supported by reliable sources, such as photographs, maps, and previous experiments rather than jailhouse inmates and bystanding children. I think Hurst’s criticisms are completely valid against the arson evidence. Therefore, I believe that the state did not prove its case that Willingham was guilty of murdering his three children. And if Willingham was actually executed for a crime that he did not commit, then other death penalty cases in the US should be carried out very cautiously and thoroughly. I almost think the death penalty should be close to abolished except in certain cases. The most recent data from the National Registry of Exonerations points to two factors as the most overwhelmingly prevalent causes of wrongful convictions in death penalty cases: official misconduct and perjury or false accusation. As of May 31, 2017, the Registry reports that official misconduct was a contributing factor in 571 of 836 homicide exonerations 68.3%, very often in combination with perjury or false accusation, which also was a contributing factor in 68.3% of homicide exonerations. According to the Registry, mistaken witness identification was present in nearly a quarter of homicide exonerations (203, 24.3%), as was false or misleading forensic evidence (194, 23.2%), and false or fabricated confessions were present in more than a fifth of the exonerations (182, 21.8%). The Registry lists inadequate legal representation at trial as a contributing factor in more than a quarter (218, 26.1%) of these wrongful homicide convictions. All of these were present in Willingham’s case. Official misconduct was seen in the board’s refusal to acknowledge Dr. Hurst’s evidence against all arson indicators. False accusation was presented by Vasquez’s inadequate investigation and the public’s general prejudice against Willingham. Mistaken witness identification was present from Johnny Webb, the inmate who claimed that Willingham confessed to the crime, and from Diane Barbee, who wasn’t always present while the fire was going on. Reliable witnesses reported that Willingham “frantically” attempting to get into the house. A false or fabricated confession came, since afterwards Webb said that he was no longer sure what he heard from Willingham, who didn’t seem like he would confess to a crime he believed he didn’t commit. Inadequate legal representation at trial was present in that most lawyers, including those who were assigned to Willingham, were convinced he had committed the crime. Lastly, arson is generally committed with larger motives, but no motive was ever identified besides Willingham simply wanting “to kill the little girls.” This is further supported by Willingham’s belief of his own innocence and Dr. Hurst’s proof that no arson was committed. Should the death penalty be abolished? Perhaps. The system is flawed, but consequences from abolishing it could lead to equally catastrophic events. The death penalty is irreversible. That much is obvious. In addition, studies have shown that the death penalty deters crime to a lesser degree than prison terms. The death penalty costs much more than prison terms. Third, there is no humane way to dispose of death row criminals. We currently have no painless way of killing a person, nor can we alleviate the pain suffered from criminals’ families. On the other hand, capital punishment is a surefire way to assure that criminals who commit atrocious crimes will not be able to commit it again. But, for mass serial killers and the worst of the worst, life sentences would be cheaper, and it would save lives. In the Willingham case, if instead they had given him a life sentence, there would have been more time for the case to be investigated, namely, by Dr. Hurst, and Willingham would have been freed before serving more than a few years in prison. According to the article, one of the prosecutors in Texas was opposed to the death penalty because of its ineffectiveness in deterring criminals and how wasteful it is. However, his superior, Batchelor, said that “certain people who commit bad enough crimes give up the right to live.” I don’t think our justice system allows persons in power to decide how bad a crime is to take a life in exchange. We can all agree that arson with multiple victims is heinous enough to mandate death, but not when the accused is falsely put to death, in which case the government is just increasing the body count.
Paulo Di Lauro had similar traits to Robin Hood, but too many significant differences exist between Robin Hood and Di Lauro to be able to consider them alike. The key characteristic of Robin Hood is he portrays the “man on the hunt.” Champion of the commoners, bane of the royals, epitome of the autonomous, Robin Hood is no common criminal. He bends the rules, twists the law by stealing for good reasons. Di Lauro is almost the antithesis. “He was so averse to standing out” (Page 6) that nobody knew about him for years. Di Lauro was quiet, unobtrusive, self-contained, and claimed he did not oppose the government. Robin Hood was outlandish, widely known, and defends against oppression from the rich and corrupt, though he supports the rightful king, Richard the Lionheart. In addition, Robin Hood didn’t have the authority to solve any problems. He was merely using his excellent skills to redistribute the balance of wealth, a noble pursuit, whereas Di Lauro did not intentionally attempt to abolish criminal acts such as gambling, theft, assault, robbery, but rather used his authority combined with his sense of justice to rid his district of wrongdoings. Nevertheless, there are similarities between Robin Hood and Di Lauro. Both had clear morals, both were loved by the people they served, and both were governed with “unwavering autonomy” (Page 10). Both Robin Hood and Di Lauro had definite ideals of what was wrong in their lives: imbalance of wealth for Robin Hood and lots of crimes and misdemeanors in Di Lauro’s district. Neither of them were driven by greed. Di Lauro was driven by “operational logic” (Page 7). It doesn’t say why Robin Hood chose to become an outlaw or why he continued to rob the rich and placate the poor. Perhaps he simply enjoyed being a law unto himself. I think Langewiesche appears sympathetic to Di Lauro’s plight. Throughout the article, Langewiesche is portraying Di Lauro as a good person, shedding light on all the great things he accomplished and how people loved him and concealing the fact that he was heading an illegal drug and counterfeit-goods empire. The people he interviewed all supported what Di Lauro did and how and why he operated. Langewiesche writes the last few paragraphs in sort of a lofty, easygoing tone; nowhere is a harsh, judging tone that reprimands Di Paulo for running a crime group. It’s almost a form of respect towards Di Paulo; Langewiesche seems to almost look up to Di Lauro for accomplishing so much, abolishing minor crimes and misdemeanors, supporting his friends, subordinates, and family, and also fixing much of the unemployment, while also putting his family at risk. This does tie in to the second article: “Why Do We Admire Mobsters?”  There is a fine line between criminals and mobsters, yet cross that fine line, and people’s thoughts about each side differ drastically. Mobsters aren’t like typical criminals in the sense that they don’t endanger common people, and are painted as “idyllic” by their families. Criminals don’t abide by any rules, almost all of them act off of personal gain, whereas mobsters live by their own codes of honor and conduct. Mobsters also became popular during Prohibition, since they were the only ones who stood up to Prohibition. By winning the people’s support, they cast aside the negative connotations associated with common criminals. Also, mobsters aren’t as widespread as criminals, which helps people create psychological distance. The concept of psychological distance is very intriguing to me. It makes perfect sense in real life and in relation to why mobsters are glamorized versus condemned: mobsters do not interfere with typical people, and when they do interact with common citizens, they usually paint themselves as good people working for the greater good. Di Lauro did not seek personal gain, his sense of justice in the world guided him to create a better community and environment within his district. I do agree with Konnikova’s arguments as to why people look up to mobsters. The psychological distance people create while also remembering all the positive associations with their mobsters, possibly familial, makes old time gangsters worthy of admiration. I’m not sure if I can say the same of modern mobsters. In the old times, family was very important to everyone, even mobsters, whereas nowadays, it seems there would be more factors that could influence mobsters to go towards the personal gain route, e.g. cybercrime. However, modern media has not changed its views on criminal behavior since crime has existed. In a nutshell, criminals are looked down upon because they negatively affect other people’s lives for their own personal gain, whereas people believe that as long as they do not participate and/or deal with the areas that mobsters deal with, they have nothing to fear from organized crime. Organized crime seems scarier, since it’s not just one person working against the populace, it’s an entire well-coordinated group. However, crime groups today still follow Omertà, and they usually have their relations fairly far up on their list of priorities.
Baby Driver is such a strange movie. Interesting, but strange. It challenges my belief of what crime is, it uproots my prejudices about criminals. I have to say that Baby is not a criminal; he simply embodies the phrase “being in the wrong place at the wrong time.” Early in the movie, Griff said, You can’t just be in crime, right? Not without being a little criminal …. Wants to sit there, in his car, keep his white shirt clean, while the rest of us, we roll in the dirt. One of these days, Baby, you’re gonna get blood on your hands. And you’re gonna find out that that s--- don’t wash off in the sink …. Gotta hand it to you, totem pole. You’re either hard as nails, or scared as s***. Griff is a key minor character to the character design of Baby. As a foil for Baby, he is portrayed as a common, stereotypical criminal. He has a tendency to insult those who he considers inferior, but doesn’t dare antagonize Doc, his superior, or Baby, who Doc vouches for. I feel like the reason Baby is able to “keep his white shirt clean” is because he technically hasn’t actively participated in killing, robbing, etc. He’s only been escaping. Perhaps here is the key. I can kind of see a parallel between Baby’s job as “escaping the crime scene” and Baby trying to escape crime altogether. After he paid off his debt to Doc, he decided to quit working for Doc as a driver. He was forced to continue via threats towards Debora’s and Joseph’s safety. Baby, however, is no ordinary criminal. In fact, I don’t believe he’s a criminal at all. According to the plot description, Baby became a getaway driver for Doc in order to pay off a debt he incurred after stealing one of Doc’s cars. Then, after he paid off that debt, Doc then blackmailed Baby to continue working for him as a driver. Baby didn’t choose the criminal life, the criminal life chose him (No memeage intended, Mr. Bayer. This was the only phrasing I could think of). He never wanted to become a criminal, he simply experienced misfortunate occurrences one after another. Yes, Baby is a nice guy caught in a bad situation. Or rather, caught in all of the bad situations. He was never a dangerous criminal. Unlike normal criminals, Baby indicates a clear and precedent concern for others: he gave one woman her purse when he stole her car, he gave the mother her baby, he brought Joseph to an assisted living home, and he prevented Debora from entering the criminal world. The ending of the movie is crucial to why I don’t believe Baby is a criminal. When he and Debora come face to face with a police roadblock, Debora steps on the gas, but Baby hits the brakes, tells Debora that she doesn’t belong in this world, steps out of the car, and surrenders. Baby has the wellbeing of others placed before his own; in this case, he doesn’t want to involve Debora in the world of crime. If he were to run, he would be endangering Debora along with himself, which is not what he wants. However, something interesting ambiguity arises in Baby’s line. If by “this world” he means the world of crime, a fairly safe assumption, does he consider himself a criminal? On one hand, it is possible that he considers himself a criminal simply because he has gotten himself involved in too many crimes and has worked with a variety of criminals. On the other hand, perhaps he simply thinks that he has witnessed crime firsthand, but has never partaken in crime. I do believe that Baby was redeemed at the end of the film by serving time in prison. He didn’t have criminal aforethought or afterthought, but I think he still had to punished because, in the most basic and fundamental ideals of our society, one can never justify committing crimes without being a criminal. Anyone who commits, or is involved in, a crime is subject to the full penalty of law. If this was real life, I would feel that 25 years in prison with a parole hearing after 5 years is too harsh. Given what I have learned about violent crime, the only two deaths that Baby was involved in were the deaths of Bats and Buddy. Buddy’s death can be considered either aggravated assault, self-defense, or manslaughter. In the movie, when Debora disarmed Buddy and Baby grabbed the gun, he shot Buddy in the knee, instead of a fatal shot. This injury caused Buddy to stumble back and fall to his death. Since Baby did not directly push or influence Buddy to fall, by this Baby would be guilty of aggravated assault. However, earlier, Buddy killed Doc in an attempt to hit Baby with a police car, presenting a clear and imminent danger to Baby. In that case, Baby was guilty of nothing; he was simply acting in self-defense, and the only way to do that was to kill Buddy. According to hg.org, Although someone may kill someone in self defense, this type of killing is not considered a crime like manslaughter or murder is. The American justice system recognizes the right of someone to protect himself or herself from harm. In order for a self defense to apply, the defendant must have believed that he or she was in imminent danger of harm and that the use and degree of force that he or she used was reasonably necessary to protect his or her safety or that of a third person. The deaths of Buddy and Bats can both be considered self-defense. In Bats’ death, Bats hit Baby with the end of a shotgun and threatened to shoot him if he didn’t move the car. In response, Baby rammed the car into a bundle of rebar, impaling and killing Bats. I think this qualifies an imminent danger of harm, since Baby had no chance of fending off a homicidal maniac like Bats. Killing him was reasonably necessary for Baby to protect himself. The only possible crime for which Baby could become convicted for would be voluntary or involuntary manslaughter, depending on whether Baby had an intent to kill Buddy and Bats. Bats, probably. Buddy, I’m not so sure. I do Baby is a person of good character. It just so happens that he became so entangled with Doc’s criminal organization that he could not untangle himself until everyone was dead. And even then, he still served five years in prison. However, I would like to know more details about when, how, and why Baby stole one of Doc’s cars. I think that this piece of information could change my perception of Baby. I found a theory about Baby Driver that basically hypothesizes that Baby stole one of Doc’s cars before the car accident that killed his parents, which causes Doc to contact his parents and let them know that they have to pay for his error, which causes the conflict we saw in the movie. After the accident, Doc then finds Baby again. With Baby’s parents gone and Baby still owing Doc money, he’s then forced to do what he does best: drive. When Baby had finally screwed everything up to save Debora, Doc knew he had pushed Baby to a breaking point. And, feeling guilty for ruining Baby’s life, he decided to help them both, finally redeeming himself in the end. However, this theory assumes that Baby was quite young when he stole Doc’s car. So if Baby had guilty intentions when he stole from Doc, perhaps it could undermine his clear conscience.
Strangely, H. H. Holmes simultaneously freaks me out and commands my respect. Perhaps I’m freaked out simply of how descriptively Larson wrote this book, but the crimes Holmes committed just seem too inhumane, too demonic, too chilling for me to only consider these crimes as history. Larson catapults me into America over 100 years ago, following the steps of Holmes, in an almost dreamlike pursuit as he silently changes America. I do not believe Holmes was born with an evil inclination. I support tabula rasa, or blank slate, the belief that people are born as blank slates. Whether they grow up to be good or evil is entirely dependent on their upbringing. This is the classical standoff between Thomas Hobbes, who believes that humans are naturally naturally evil, by which only thinking about themselves and their own possessions was the first thing that they cared about, and John Locke, who feels that people are naturally good, there are just some who’ve been led in the wrong direction. In the context of Devil in the White City, I support neither. I merely believe people are born in the middle, neither good nor bad. Their moral codes of conduct are developed and integrated through their experiences, societies, and upbringings. I think Holmes was brought up in a less-than-ideal manner, which scarred him as a child, and those scars remained with him as he grew up. A key portion of the opening of the book describes Holmes’ first experience with a human skeleton, which described Holmes as “gazing at the skeleton with cool appreciation.” And when he turned to gaze and his captors, it was them who ran. Later when he was imprisoned, Holmes recounts that him being face to face with a skeleton at a young age “proved a heroic method of treatment, destined ultimately to cure me of my fears, and to inculcated in me, first, a strong feeling of curiosity, and later, a desire to learn, which resulted years afterwards in my adopting medicine as a profession.” But I think this early encounter with such a macabre spectacle had more infernal effects that simply giving him the desire to learn and becoming a doctor. It caused him to turn to the darker side of life, especially in regards to the crimes he committed in his later years. Later observers speculated these boxes also contained treasures of a more macabre sort. They based this speculation on the hard lessons learned during the 20th century about the behavior of children of similar character. According to other popular articles, in the 19th century, average families relied on their children to assist in making a living, especially those who relied on agriculture to live. These “hard lessons” likely refer to forms of punishment given to children at a young age; I believe there is a direct correlation with harsh upbringing and detrimental effects on a child’s psyche and that those effects would progress into more aberrant manifestations. According to the book, Holmes was no exception: his parents were devout Methodists whose response to even routine misbehavior relied heavily on the rod and prayer, followed by banishment to the attic and a day with neither speech nor food. Genius gone bad. This seems like a fair characterization of Holmes. He was intelligent, handsome, charming and charismatic, well-spoken, and liked the ladies, and they liked him. His extraordinary personality is one aspect that helped him commit so many murders. He stripped away women’s barriers of caution, and when they trusted him, he killed them. According to the book, Holmes enjoyed the feeling of control over women, especially when he had locked them in his vault: the variety of options with which to kill them gave him pleasure. Holmes is an “Angel of Death.” In addition, Holmes had the perfect cover for his entire criminal operation. The Columbian Exposition created so much chaos in Chicago that even regular, albeit occasional, disappearances of women were not uncommon enough that it would have attracted the attention of the Chicago Police. I don’t believe this many murders and/or disappearances could have gone undetected in a different city. Or, at least, unless a different city had an event of similar grandeur. There is no chance Holmes could have committed these crimes today. Today, there are so many cameras and social awareness/surveillance that one reported disappearance would likely cause 10 times the amount of effort spent by detectives in the book to be spent today. I guess it would be theoretically possible, that if Holmes was situated in a large city and he found out more about his victims, he could pull off such crimes today. However, people today are a lot more cautious. Take, for example, hitchhiking. Almost nobody hitchhikes today, mostly because people have become a lot more wary of hitchhikers. However, just a few decades ago, everyone hitchhiked. Similarly, I think women today would be a lot more alert and suspicious of Holmes’ actions and less likely to succumb to his charm. I think what ultimately led to Holmes’ downfall was united, concerted effort to have him “pay up”, to use crude terms. Initially, no one accused him of foul play, but the first major crime they found Holmes guilty of was killing Pitezel, claiming his insurance, and then proceeding to kill his three children. Arguably, I can’t say how much Geyer’s persistence affected his eventual capture of Holmes, but I don’t think Holmes would have gotten away with killing Alice, Nellie, and Howard. Carrie Pitezel would have reported that her children were missing if Geyer had relented and she was received no letters from her family. Holmes’ famous saying that inspired Devil in the White City was “I was born with the devil in me.” I, along with others, respectfully disagree. Nobody is born with inherent good or evil in them. A person’s moral compass is developed just like a work of art does not simply pop onto a canvas; it has to be masterfully executed by the artist. Let me just say I love the way Larson writes history. Writing about an entire historic event in the form of a novel is, I believe, far more appealing to a regular audience than, say, a textbook. That being said, if you were to write every single historically significant event as a novel, it would take you forever. The value of writing for a regular audience compared to the academic community is that it is more readily accepted by people who find different forms of writing more engaging. For me, learning about H. H. Holmes from a novel is more engaging than learning about him through online articles or even from the lecture (no offense, Bayer).