Digital Distraction: Raising my generation’s awareness towards digital distraction seems akin to lecturing an alcoholic about the negative effects of drinking. We are quite aware that we suffer from a common symptom, but teaching us about and confirming our uneasy prejudices towards that symptom is not an effective form of treatment. At its core, digital distraction is similar to any other form of addiction: its undoing needs to come from each person’s within. From our in-class discussions, we learned about two theories that explain the growth of distraction from Rothman’s article, as well as the negative changes to our society caused by the rise of mobile communication from Turkle’s TED talk. We learned that digital distraction comes from innovative technological advancements combined with people’s predilection towards stimulants. This has led to many negative changes to people’s behavior, including procrastination, social ineptitude, and the burden of maintaining a virtual image of near perfection. Crawford presented an interesting idea regarding the spiritual theory about the rise of distraction, citing Pascal’s words: “All men’s miseries derive from not being able to sit in a quiet room alone.” This is related to Turkle’s idea regarding people’s limited capacity for self-reflection. Technology as a form of escapist entertainment liberates people from the troubling circumstances in real life. But at the same time, this discourages people to face issues that arise in real life. As someone who often plays both sides, technology is both a boon and a bane. The number of times I have made the following order of keystrokes, Ctrl+T, Y, Enter, is innumerable. On the other hand, I am extremely grateful for Discord, my main and only form of social media. I keep in contact with friends, make new acquaintances, and collaborate with classmates. I do wish to shed light on the drastic differences between current times and when the articles we discussed in class were written. The onset of global quarantine thanks to COVID-19 has changed the way technology impacts our lives. Now, the hyperuse of digital communication is a necessity. Nowadays, technology plays a huge part in letting people stay in contact with their friends, family, colleagues, etc. However, alongside the positives of technology’s contributions, quarantine has also led to a drop in normal outside activities, leading to more and more time spent online. Human beings are social animals. But it seems that technology has adversely contorted our definition of social interaction. Objectively speaking, technology is a tool, one that is not inherently morally right or wrong. It is its utilization by people that decides which side of this double-edged sword takes precedence over the other.
Ethical Hacking: People generally associate the term “hacking” with illicit activity, criminal behavior, and cyberharm. After all, people might envision an intelligent yet profit-seeking, computer-proficient individual sitting in a dark room furiously typing away at a computer screen trying to break past some form of cybersecurity when they are asked to picture a hacker. However, the good side of hacking is something most people are less aware about. Hackers can be divided into black hat hackers and white hat hackers, where the former usually harm or damage computer systems to obtain personal profit with malicious intent, while the latter use their computer skills positively, performing what is known as ethical hacking. Today, individuals and organizations across the world increasingly use the Internet. Along with this come a variety of concerns regarding the security of consumer, financial, and medical data. For this reason, computer experts and white hat hackers are an invaluable resource in today’s digitally driven world. Ethical hacking is an authorized process of attempting to gain access over a defined network, computer, system, or data. It is performed by security experts (white hats) aimed to improve the security posture of an organization rather than degrade it like black hats. An ethical hack can be defined as how perfectly one can copy malicious hacker’s actions and strategies. Ethical hackers identify and resolve vulnerabilities and before less welcome visitors come prowling into the system. They work proactively while pentesting the systems or networks on approval of the organization. It is important to note that said approval forms one of the first and foremost conditions regarding the protocol of ethical hackers. Obviously, the position is granted an enormous amount of power, and it takes a person of good character and moral value to successfully perform such a task while not swaying in the ethical backing of ethical hacking. Kant argues that a person is good or bad depending on the motivation of their actions and not on the goodness of the consequences of those actions. For ethical hackers, the motivation behind their actions is improving the cybersecurity of the corporation/organization they work for. It is also worth noting that such motivation is shaped by the ethical standard that an ethical hacker believes they are ethically virtuous, i.e. they would much rather do the right thing by staying employed as an ethical hacker than turn to black hat hacking and risk being caught. I’m sure ethical hackers, having the ability to hack for good or for evil, would understand what it would be like to be hacked themselves. After all, a significant portion of ethical hackers came from shadier backgrounds, and their new positions as ethical hackers was likely accompanied by a change in character. Therefore, ethical hackers would adhere to the 2nd Categorical Imperative, striving to work against evil hackers and expressing their moral virtue through their computing skills.
Technology: Objective or Subjective?: Knives can pierce skin. Knives can also create culinary masterpieces. A climbing rope can improve the physical fortitudes of many people. A rope can also choke the last living breath out of a helpless victim. Tools are ubiquitous, and are meant to convenience our everyday lives. But a tool does not exert any control or willpower over its wielder; it simply follows orders. Technology is no different. Computers were built as comprehensive appliances, containing a plethora of utilities, information, and other useful applications that the average person would need. However, they are also being used to hack into major corporations, crippling the safety and cybersecurity protecting the digital confidentiality of society. Planes were built as transportation for large numbers of people who wish to travel considerable distances, not meant to be brought down in unspeakable acts of terror, claiming the lives of thousands. The objective evaluation of technology isn’t in the hands of technology itself, but rather is dependent on the person using that technology. In our class discussions, we debated over four scenarios regarding different forms of technology, their usages, and their ethical backings. But one untouched conclusion that pertains to all four scenarios was that when we decided whether each scenario was ethically right, we never considered the implementation of the technology itself, whether the technology itself was conscious, aware, or purposeful, intending to operate a certain way. Instead, we evaluated the morals and intentions of the people using the technology, whether it was Alexis, the EDSP, or you, the software engineer. Especially with the EDSP; in my opinion, the EDSP did absolutely nothing wrong. People getting upset over the government using high-resolution cameras to accurately and effectively diminish speeding is just plain nonsense. If you’re going to get paranoid over high-tech cameras being able to capture your face, that doesn’t stop you from setting up facial recognition on your iPhone, does it? You can’t apply a bias to a single form of technology when there are many forms that could be used to identify you, you just don’t know about them. The EDSP killed two birds with one stone with this technology advancement: reducing speeding and arresting terrorists. They are not going to use the cameras for any malicious purposes; their motives for using such technology is good. Therefore, such use cannot be viewed as ethically wrong. In my Philosophy class, we discussed how moral agency is the ability to make ethical decisions based on what is right or wrong. Therefore, it would be incorrect to judge a technology’s moral foundation, since technology does not have conscious will, choose its own course of action, nor have the ability to reason and use logic. That technology can be fundamentally good or bad is a fallacy. Instead, technology is merely an extension of a person’s will, so the moral jurisdiction of what tasks technology performs is purely based on the user’s motives and ethics.
COVID and Misinformation: an Infodemic: The ubiquitous acceptance of social media and the spread of misinformation lead countless Internet users astray. The Internet is a global system that can be used for sharing information, providing worldwide services and communication. However, information as a neutral tool, used to raise awareness and increase knowledge in users, is a double-edged sword: news platforms and other reliable media have been broadcasting and reporting on current events for decades. But recently, the rise of misinformation, or “fake news,” has misled many Internet users, which can cause devastating impacts when a portion of the population acts contrarily, threatening even greater amounts of people in the current midst of both a pandemic and an infodemic. An “infodemic” is a term coined to describe the global spread of misinformation, mimicking the global spread of a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has been accompanied by one of these infodemics, where the global spread of misinformation has detrimental effects on the general public’s health and safety, as well as the aggravation of the pandemic’s trajectory. Researchers from McGill University in Montreal amassed data sets from nearly 2.5 million tweets explicitly referring to COVID-19 in the Canadian context, as well as over nine thousand articles from nineteen Canadian English-language news sites from the same time period (Bridgman et al. 2020). The most important finding of this research was that they found comparatively higher amounts of misinformation on Twitter, as opposed to more recommendations for safe practices during the pandemic from the new sites, indicating a large difference in information quality across different media (Bridgman et al. 2020). In addition, the recurring resilience of misinformation causes viewers to experience a reinforcing effect, where familiarity with misinformation leads to stronger belief in said misinformation. “Only one form of contagion travels faster than a virus. And that’s fear.” - Dan Brown, Inferno. The infodemic alongside COVID-19 can lead people to not observe proper quarantine practices, which can then lead to these people who have been led astray to endanger innocent individuals. Take Twitter, for instance. When a tweet is published, it doesn’t take long for the retweet count to rack up extremely quickly. Word spreads, and it spreads extremely quickly. Oftentimes people don’t know who to trust, and see good advice as bad simply because it interferes with their normal lives. People also prefer to blend in with crowds, which is how the bandwagon effect comes into play. Misinformation downplaying the severity of the pandemic can cause people to slack off and not remain vigilant and safe in times of crisis.
Privacy: Most things exist in a balance. Light and dark. Hot and cold. Young and old. Well, if humans are social animals, surely there exists a concept, a social construct that, interestingly, exists as the opposite to sociality. That construct is privacy. Privacy developed as a form of protection, an invisible boundary that accompanied the staggering rise in the world population as well as the increasing density of communities in past decades. It is almost impossible to know everyone in your neighborhood when your neighborhood is no longer the small, cutesy town like those based in secluded areas back in the day. The home is a sanctuary; what each family utilizes that privacy to do is a separate matter. That is not an issue of privacy, it is one of familial harmony, or dissonance otherwise. Privacy is built on the foundation of trust, or lack thereof, caused by a growing society in which people grow further apart. We all have our secrets. Who we share those secrets with is a manifestation of privacy. Distrust of most people leads to relatively exclusive friendship and acquaintance circles, where people maintain intimate relationships/friendships with people they feel comfortable sharing more information with. I myself am a prime example. I have three very distinctly drawn friendship circles: acquaintances, friends, and close friends, the last of which I treasure the most and consider one of the most private parts of my life. My mental health is probably my most important secret, and my close friends are the only ones I talk about it with. The textbook’s section on privacy and trust is rather lacking, but the general gist is intuitive. Pre-quarantine, I rarely spoke to my outer two friendship circles about personal things. As a matter of fact, I rarely spoke to them at all, being a very introverted person. However, I valued “life talks” with my close friends as a form of therapy to alleviate some of the symptoms of my degenerating mental health. These we swore to keep private, since most people would not be able to relate how personal, emotionally deep, or sensitive these conversations could get. Privacy as a protective barrier, keeping our discussions confidential, allows for intimacy and emotional connection to bloom between me and my close friends.