Does Heat Affect How People Play Minecraft?: Does heat make people more aggressive? Theoretically, it seems feasible. People seem to become more irritable when it is hot outside, or when they are sweating, myself included. However, to go about designing a study to test this hypothesis, there are two things to consider: one, heat affects people in different ways. Some people like myself prefer the cold, while others prefer the heat, and a person’s preferences can change the effects heat has on them. Two, aggression is not easy to measure. Statistically significant results are generally in the form of numbers, data, confidence intervals, correlations, etc. But aggression is a human emotion, a behavioral expression, something intangible. One of my fellow peers at our table suggested observing people’s workout routines, monitoring their behavior and practices, such as how many times or how hard they punch a punching bag, if they slam down weights, if they make noises that indicate exertion. However, it is difficult to measure aggression during a workout. For instance, how do you interpret how much someone grunts? Perhaps they are simply doing it because of physical exertion. In addition, it would be difficult to distinguish between what a subject’s normal behavior when working out is and the same subject’s behavior under a controlled setting. It would take too much time to get to know the subjects beforehand. Lastly, some people have never worked out, and even if an experiment’s sample was only people who work out, we would only be able to generalize conclusions to people who work out, not a general population, which means we could not safely conclude anything about our hypothesis. Such an experiment is possible, it just wouldn’t be too accurate, since there are too many confounding variables, which can affect the results of the experiment. I decided on something different: Minecraft. Minecraft is a game that allows the player the freedom to do as they please within the block realm, provided they take the necessary precautions to stay alive. My experiment is as follows: I would have two sections of two groups each, which means four groups total. Both sections will play in the Survival gamemode, where no cheats are allowed. However, within the Survival gamemode, there are different difficulty levels: Peaceful, Easy, Normal, and Hardcore. One section will play in Peaceful mode, and the other in Easy mode. The difference here is that in Peaceful mode, players do not lose hunger, nor do hostile monsters, more commonly known as “mobs,” appear, so players do not have to worry about the “survival” part of the game. The other section, who will play in Easy mode, will have some, but not many, hostile mobs appear and will lose hunger, but very slowly. The caveat is that in Easy mode, players need a steady supply of food. However, there are more than a few ways to keep up with hunger in Minecraft. It could be planting a farm, raising livestock, living as a nomad, etc. Essentially, my experiment wants to focus on how the players play, what they do, how many animals and mobs they kill. Some players may settle down, build a house to keep themselves safe, raise livestock, plant a farm, and play what the name suggests: mine and craft. Some players may play aggressively, without a dwelling of their own, going around challenging anything that may stand in their way. Especially since Minecraft has a built-in mechanism that keeps track of players’ statistics, it becomes easier to find different quantities and observations and attribute those to aggression. Now, the last part I haven’t explained is why each section is divided into two groups. Within each section, one group will be placed in a pleasant, air-conditioned room at about 68 degrees Fahrenheit, while the other group will be placed in a mildly hot, light-sweat-inducing room at about 99 degrees. Not too hot, or else the individuals may be too preoccupied with their physical condition to play the game. Each group will have at least 10 randomly selected individuals, so as to offset any confounding variables that may occur, such as if an individual’s age, if they play video games, if they are familiar with Minecraft, etc. The sole independent variable would be the temperature of the room, and the dependent variable would be the gameplay. Keep all other factors the same: same Minecraft versions, same computers, same mice, same duration, etc. By diversifying our sample and controlling only that which we want to test, I hope that accurate, explanatory conclusions can be drawn about the correlation between heat and aggression, if it exists. From each player, my experiment would record quantitative values of the following over the duration of gameplay: how many animals were killed; how many mobs were killed; how many food items were gathered/created, divided by type; and how many food items were consumed. We would also record the following qualitative values: if a house was built, if a farm was created, if livestock were raised, if a mine of some sort was created. However, one important lesson that I took from AP Statistics, and I assume the same holds true in Psychology: correlation does not imply causation. Just because changes in the independent variable and changes in the dependent variable occurred at the same time does not mean the independent caused the dependent. Minecraft gameplay perhaps is not the best indicator of aggression. After all, we cannot assume anything about our randomly chosen subjects and how much they already know. It is possible that a majority of our sample would be new players, and hence would caution against approaching anything hostile, let alone trying to kill it. As a possible second, follow-up experiment, we could select new samples from people who already know how to play the game, from people like me, who don’t play the game much but know how to. After all, it would be easier to detect differences in gameplay if we observe players who already have preferences. My gut instinct is to say there is a moderately strong correlation between heat and aggression. Without having ever researched this before, I came up with a few thoughts on why this correlation exists. One possible explanation is that when people get hot, they sweat, and when sweat clings to skin, it becomes somewhat irritating, and that irritation is then sent to the brain and released in a different form. For instance, why is a shower so soothing? I think it’s because most people prefer their natural state to be clean, washed, odorless skin, and a shower gets as close to clean skin as possible. Of course, it is impossible to have perfectly clean skin, but that is a biology discussion. Sweat is something our body naturally produces, but when it stays in contact with our skin for too long, it annoys us. However, one counterargument is that many people like to party in the summer, whether it be pool parties, barbecues, or anything of the like. Could parties be considered a form of aggression, just not harmful aggression? If parties could be linked to exuberant expulsion of emotions, then perhaps it is a positive form of aggression.
“We are our memories.” - Dodge, Brain Jack. Written by Brian Falkner, Brain Jack is a short novel I read some years ago. It is set in a not too distant future, where the protagonists seek to shut down an artificial intelligence neural-programming operating system, coined Ursula, who has developed a sentience unintentionally learned by the collection consciousness of millions of neuro-headset users, in effect allowing Ursula to carry out a “hive mind’s will,” destroying the minds of those who sought to shut Ursula down and modifying the memories of those she controlled to eliminate those who were out of her reach. In the novel, after Ursula has been discovered as a widespread neuro-epidemic, the protagonists spend much time escaping her grasp, avoiding neuro-headset users and plotting to shut her down using their hacking abilities and computer viruses. While they escape people who have had their memories modified by Ursula, a continual discussion about how they are being framed arises. Ursula seemingly has the power to modify people’s memories to shape her will, to frame the protagonists for Ursula’s crimes: irreparably destroying the minds of those who would otherwise suspect her. While her methods are not perfect, they are enough to dissuade the people of power from suspecting anyone other than the protagonists. In actuality, overreliance on memory is a major contention in the novel. People recall seeing the protagonists doing things that would otherwise incriminate them, instead of checking reliable sources, such as security camera footage. One of the protagonists, Dodge, had his mind healed after suffering a moderate amount of destruction from Ursula. He then discusses how Ursula had planted some false memories in his mind, and that they contradicted with some of his actual memories. He then opines the quote above. This begs the question: just how reliable are our memories? Through numerous cases of false testimony, distortion, filtered reconstruction, and other subconscious alterations made to memory, it is clear that the statement “Memory works like a tape recorder - it is a playback recording of our actual experiences” is incorrect. A key rule to memory change and preservation is called “fade-to-gist,” whereby the details of an experience are rapidly forgotten but understanding of its gist is retained for much longer (Barclay, 2013). Many wrongful convictions that were later overturned by DNA evidence were based on eyewitness reports (Barclay, 2013). Memories are far from exact. They may be insightful, but their accuracy is not perfect. Memory is not like a tape recorder. Remembering something does not entail rewinding our brains to the moment. Remembering is a reconstruction process. Neuroscientists have shown that each time we remember something, we are reconstructing the event, reassembling it from traces throughout the brain (Eisold, 2012). However, within that reconstruction is where the gray area comes from. Many outside influences can sway the rebuilding of a memory, especially those recounted during court testimonies. Eyewitness misidentifications are known to have played a role in 70 percent of the 349 wrongful convictions that have been overturned based on DNA evidence so far (Wixted & Mickes, 2017). Surprisingly, participants in a memory experiment were easily persuaded to have seen and recall different from what they actually experienced. In much the same way, an eyewitness can falsely incriminate an innocent person. Does this mean that eyewitness testimony is faulty and should be eliminated entirely? No. Consider the important, and often overlooked, distinction between malleability and reliability. Just because memory can be contaminated with the trace of an innocent person does not mean that it has to be unreliable. What it means is that the malleability of memory can harm reliability. Once this fact is appreciated, then proper testing protocols can be put in place to minimize the likelihood that the original memory trace is contaminated (Wixted & Mickes, 2017). It is not that eyewitness testimony is unreliable due to the malleability of recollection and memory, it is simply that proper assurance protocols and policies should be implemented, through the joint efforts of lawmen and psychologists, to ascertain the authenticity of eyewitness accounts. "Leading the witness" is the method of questioning a witness by which he or she is directed to answer in a way expected by the attorney. It is a form of obstruction justice and is illegal. However, isn’t eyewitness testimony also a form of mentally leading the witness? Especially under intense interrogations from officers, witness can feel pressured to agree with whoever is questioning them, and that pressure can alter memories. A 14-year-cold case in 2017 was cracked by investigators who developed a technique called cognitive interviewing, which was designed to help police question witnesses without blurring their memories (Baggaley, 2017). When witnesses learn new information about a crime, they can fold those details into their understanding of the event, regardless of whether those details are correct (Baggaley, 2017). Essentially, the interview practice involved less question-asking and more story-prompting. Simply the distinction between narrowly focused questions and broader, open-ended conversation made significant differences in the accuracy and the reliabilities of eyewitness accounts. It was also advisable to avoid pressing the witness to provide details that they feel uncertain about. The quality of the information, or the correctness rather, is more important that the quantity of the information, especially when it comes to something as crucial as the difference between convicting an innocent and imprisoning the guilty.
Children at the age of six are in the latter phases of Piaget’s preoperational stage, whereas children at the age of ten are in the latter phases of Piaget’s concrete operational stage. At the age of six, children are developing a stronger grasp on their understanding of language and speaking, as well as becoming adept at symbol usage, as seen in playing and pretending. One famous technique Piaget developed to study the mental abilities of children in the preoperational stage was egocentrism, which describes children’s inability to consider someone else’s point of view. Another factor of children’s mental capacities was the idea of conservation, where children were more likely to identify a taller, narrower beaker as having more water than a shorter, wider beaker when in reality they held the same volumetric amount. Much of Piaget’s focus at this stage of development stemmed from what children could not yet do. The concepts of conservation and egocentrism are both centered on abilities that children have not yet developed; they lack the understanding that things look different to other people (different points of view) and that objects can change in appearance while still maintaining the same properties (beakers of water) (Cherry, 2017). At the age of ten, children are ironing out their understanding of logic and inductive reasoning. However, they still struggle with abstract ideas, as well as deductive reasoning. Children begin developing understanding of reversibility, or awareness that actions can be reversed. An example of this would be reversing the order of relationships between categories (Cherry, 2017). Children grasp conservation and become less egocentric, learning to think about things the way others see them. One important characteristic of the concrete operational stage is children’s ability to engage in “decentration,” where they are able to focus on multiple aspects of a situation at the same time. According to Cherry, children begin to develop away from egocentrism and become more sociocentric, whereby they begin to understand that others also have unique perspectives. In terms of expectations and conformities, children of the same age tend to exhibit similar behaviors and actions. Six-year-olds know to conserve number but not mass. For example, they can identify that two rows of pennies have the same number of pennies even if one row has its pennies spread out. However, they are less likely to be able to identify that a ball of Play-Doh has the same mass as that same ball flattened out, as we saw in class. In addition, younger children express strong, often polar thoughts about things. They may label some things as good and others as bad, but may have trouble finding the middle ground, or the common, everyday notion of “it depends.” Snitching, tattling, and “telling on somebody” begin to occur in younger children around this age. Curiosity also expands exponentially. One interesting factor of six-year-olds’ lives is the notion of danger. While rudimentary risk avoidance is developed early on, caution is not and will not be exhibited for a subsequent few years. Combined with young children’s innate curiosity with their surroundings, it poses a risk to almost all children. We often see parents closely shadowing their children, letting them touch and feel what is safe but hastily steering them away from potential dangers. This in turn further develops a child’s cognition. Through assimilation and accommodation, two processes in Piaget’s model of intellectual growth (McLeod, 2018), children learn and develop ideas of what is safe to approach and what is best circumvented per the years of experience their parents have. I have a single sibling, my brother, who is four years younger than I am. When he was six, I remember him as developing language and social skills, as well as understanding more and more of what other people say. I too remember my parents walking and running with my brother, to keep up and provide loving parental guidance while also ensuring his safety. In addition, this was around the time when my family and I moved back to China. I am not sure what effect this cultural transition had on my brother, especially him being at such a young age, but I think that because he was a relatively cleaner slate compared to me, part of his cognitive development differed from mine due to the cultural and societal differences in China compared to the US. There is much less emphasis on etiquette in China, which I think explains, at least to some degree, why I’ve always thought my brother is a bit less educated in regards to the general area of conventions and etiquette. Ten-year-olds will obviously be quite different from their younger counterparts. Many children are now old enough and physically capable of carrying on simple adult tasks. While children at this age can follow simple operating procedures and are better at problem-solving, research has shown that they often cannot apply knowledge in actual stressful situations. Peer pressure also begins to emerge around this time. Combined with still weak perceptions of risk-taking, it is within adults’ and parents’ wisdom to determine what their child/children can and cannot do. When I was ten, after we had just moved to China, I wasn’t too keen to try out new things and didn’t rush to do adult tasks, but I believe that was because I have always been a cautious person, even as a child, and I tend to gauge everything I am experiencing before coming to a concrete decision. On the other hand, when my brother was ten and I was fourteen, we had just moved back from China back to the US. My brother, being a tad impulsive and extroverted child, was much more eager to seek opportunities to do “big-boy” activities, to use a colloquial term. Especially growing up with an older brother, he never really liked it when I was trusted with more tasks than he was simply because he was younger. Perhaps there are anomalies in what behaviors can be expected from children of a certain age. I have a very, very vivid memory of when I was around seven or eight. I was sitting on my bed, with a multiplication table up to 20 times 20 on the wall behind me, and my father quizzing me on the entire multiplication table from 10 times 10 up to 20 times 20. I decided to look into the memory capacities of children and how those capacities change as children progress through the different stages of cognitive development. In research published in the journal Memory, Patricia Bauer and her colleague Marina Larkina brought in groups of children between the ages of three and nine, inclusive, along with their parents and asked the parents to interview their children about events that happened over the prior three months (Gammon, 2014). The results that after children surpass the age of around 6-7, they start to remember less events and in different ways. Bauer opines that neural structures undergo a lot of postnatal development. Early in development those structures are working, but not very efficiently -- children are forming memories, but through natural processes those are fading and becoming inaccessible. By the time children reach adulthood, those memories are working very effectively (Gammon, 2014). According to Dr. Amso, young children can make long-term-like memories, but these memories typically fade after a certain age or stage of brain development. Matching this to Bauer’s research, it seems possible that children experience a drastic shift in memory usage and capacity around the end of the preoperational stage. Memories made in later childhood and beyond are more likely to stick because the young brain, especially the hippocampus and the frontoparietal regions, undergoes important developmental changes that improve our ability to bind, store and recall events (Amso, 2017).